
Evil
====

The [Catholic Encyclopedia (1913)](http://newadvent.org/cathen) identifies
three different senses of the word
'[evil](http://newadvent.org/cathen/05649a.htm)'.  "It should be observed that
evil is of three kinds — physical, moral, and metaphysical."

 1. "*Physical evil* includes all that causes harm to man, whether by bodily
    injury, by thwarting his natural desires, or by preventing the full
    development of his powers, either in the order of nature directly, or
    through the various social conditions under which mankind naturally exists.
    Physical evils directly due to nature are sickness, accident, death, etc.
    Poverty, oppression, and some forms of disease are instances of evil
    arising from imperfect social organization. Mental suffering, such as
    anxiety, disappointment, and remorse, and the limitation of intelligence
    which prevents human beings from attaining to the full comprehension of
    their environment, are congenital forms of evil; each vary in character and
    degree according to natural disposition and social circumstances."

 2. "By *moral evil* are understood the deviation of human volition from the
    prescriptions of the moral order and the action which results from that
    deviation. Such action, when it proceeds solely from ignorance, is not to
    be classed as moral evil, which is properly restricted to the motions of
    will towards ends of which the conscience disapproves."

 3. "*Metaphysical evil* is the limitation by one another of various component
    parts of the natural world.  Through this mutual limitation natural objects
    are for the most part prevented from attaining to their full or ideal
    perfection, whether by the constant pressure of physical condition, or by
    sudden catastrophes.  Thus, animal and vegetable organisms are variously
    influenced by climate and other natural causes; predatory animals depend
    for their existence on the destruction of life; nature is subject to storms
    and convulsions, and its order depends on a system of perpetual decay and
    renewal due to the interaction of its constituent parts....  The nature and
    degree of pain in lower animals is very obscure, and in the necessary
    absence of data it is difficult to say whether it should rightly be classed
    with the merely formal evil which belongs to inanimate objects, or with the
    suffering of human beings. The latter view was generally held in ancient
    times, and may perhaps be referred to the anthropomorphic tendency of
    primitive minds which appears in the doctrine of metempsychosis. Thus it
    has often been supposed that animal suffering, together with many of the
    imperfections of inanimate nature, was due to the fall of man, with whose
    welfare, as the chief part of creation, were bound up the fortunes of the
    rest (see Theoph.  Antioch., Ad Autolyc., II; cf. Genesis 3 and 1
    Corinthians 9).

Negativity
----------

"It is evident again that all evil is essentially negative and not positive;
i.e. it consists not in the acquisition of anything, but in the loss or
deprivation of something necessary for perfection. Pain, which is the test or
criterion of physical evil, has indeed a positive, though purely subjective
existence as a sensation or emotion; but its evil quality lies in its
disturbing effect on the sufferer. In like manner, the perverse action of the
will, upon which moral evil depends, is more than a mere negation of right
action, implying as it does the positive element of choice; but the morally
evil character of wrong action is constituted not by the element of choice, but
by its rejection of what right reason requires."

